docs: add mappers docs guide (#7394)
meltano/meltano: docs/src/_guide/mappers.md

---
title: Inline Data Mapping
description: Alter records and streams on the fly.
layout: doc
weight: 5
---

Meltano gives you the flexibility to alter data passing through your EL pipelines to do precisely what you need for your use case.
Although commonly users want to replicate their data in the most raw format, using [ELT vs ETL](https://meltano.com/blog/the-benefits-of-elt-vs-etl-what-you-need-to-know/
), there are many use cases that require minor alterations to data on the fly.
This is where mappers, or also referred to as inline stream maps, shine!

# Features

The mapper features can be viewed in 2 categories: stream level or property (record) level.
Stream level features allow you to modify the stream itself, whereas the property level features allow you to modify contents of the stream.

## Stream Level

- Aliasing: streams can be aliased to provide custom naming downstream.

> - Filtering: streams records can be filtered based on any user-defined logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Filtering: stream records can be filtered based on any user-defined logic.
```

With the way we've got property level changes labeled as `property (record)` this sentence is suddenly very confusing to me. Would `property (column)` be more appropriate?

Author: @tayloramurphy I agree its confusing. I updated to column.

This is the easiest way to get mapper functionality into your pipeline by avoiding some of the limitations of standalone mappers (only works with `meltano run`, requires installing another plugin, etc.).
The limitation is that the mapper functionality is baked into the SDK so if you ever need to make customizations its a bit less flexible relative to standalone mappers where you can create your own forks.

A few example configurations using inline stream maps are:

#### Example

This example shows the SDK based meltanolabs variant of tap-github configured to lowercase all repo names in the issues stream.

```yaml
  - name: tap-github
    variant: meltanolabs
    pip_url: git+https://github.com/MeltanoLabs/tap-github.git
    config:
      stream_maps:
        issues:
          repo: record['repo'].lower()
```

For more details and examples refer to the [SDK documentation](https://sdk.meltano.com/en/latest/stream_maps.html).

## Standalone Mapper Plugins

The other way of getting mapper functionality is to use a standalone mapper plugin that is inserted between your tap and target to do the translation `meltano run tap-csv <MAPPER> target-jsonl`.

> These can be used even whether or not your tap and/or target are SDK based, it's your choice how you implement mappers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These can be used even when your your tap and/or target are not SDK based.
```

> The limitation with this approach is that currently you can only run these using the `meltano run` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The limitation with this approach is that currently you can only run these using the `meltano run` command and not using `meltano elt` or `meltano invoke`.
```

The advantage relative to the SDK inline stream maps is that you can fork the mapper plugin or build your own to do whatever you need.

The two most common mapper plugins are:

- [meltano-map-transform](https://github.com/MeltanoLabs/meltano-map-transform)
- [pipelinewise-transform-field](https://github.com/transferwise/pipelinewise-transform-field)

These can be added like any other plugin:

```bash
meltano discover mappers
meltano add mapper <mapper name>

# Example
meltano add mapper meltano-map-transform
```

#### Example

An example taken from the [meltano-map-transformer](https://github.com/MeltanoLabs/meltano-map-transform/examples) repository shows the mapper altering casing of the data.
Given this input CSV and mapper configurations:

```csv
id,first_name,last_name,email,ip_address
1,Ethe,Book,ebook0@twitter.com,67.61.243.220
```

```yaml

>   - name: meltano-map-transformer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugins
  mapper:
    - name: meltano-map-transformer
```

might be useful to give the context of where this is in the file.

    mappings:
    - name: lower
      config:
        stream_maps:
          customers:
            __alias__: customers_v5
            first_name: first_name.lower() # three different ways of accessing the variable
            last_name: record['last_name'].lower()
            email:  _['email'].upper()
            count_t: str(last_name.count("t")) # need to cast to str because it could be NULL!
            ip_address: __NULL__
```

After running `meltano run tap-csv hash_email target-sqlite` the result would be:

| count_t |           email            | first_name | id | last_name  |        __loaded_at         |
|---------|----------------------------|------------|----|------------|----------------------------|
| 0       | EBOOK0@TWITTER.COM         | ethe       | 1  | book       | 2023-03-17 16:57:19.095880 |

To see more examples check out the [plugin repo](https://github.com/MeltanoLabs/meltano-map-transform/examples).

## FAQs

### Can I used standalone mapper plugins with the `meltano elt` command?

No, currently only `meltano run` support standalone mapper plugins.

### Can I use mapping features with the BATCH message type?

> No, BATCH message type does not currently support mapping functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, BATCH message type does not currently support mapping functionality.
Follow along with [this discussion](https://github.com/meltano/meltano/discussions/6639#discussioncomment-3417860) where we talk about how stream maps could support BATCH messages.
```
